R_packages.md, before:

## low-dependency packages
Packages depends only on R or base-R packages.

- data.table
- stringi
- cli
- rlang
- withr
- glue
- rprojroot and here

## base

**warning()**

R warning messages are usually suppressed for a clean run. In case of custom warning message in functions, we prefer to show the warning when running the function. In this case, we will have to be explicit when calling warning()

```r
my_function <- function(x) {
    # other code
    if (x < 0) {
        # immediate. = TRUE to print warning message no matter what the warn option is
        warning("x is negative", immediate. = TRUE)
    }
    print(x)
}

my_function(-1)
#  Warning in my_function(-1) : x is negative
#  [1] -1
```

To view option of warning

```r
getOption("warn")
```

- `2`: turn warnings into errors and stop run.
- `1`: same as set `immediate. = TRUE`, print warning message immediatedly.
- `0`: store the warning until top level function returns, that is, the warning message is not printed where you want it be, but instead the whole function completes.
- `-1`: warnings are ignored.
- `-2`: warnings are ignored.


**tempfile()**

Each R session has a unique temporary directory, which can be created by `tempdir()`. To create multiple unique subdirectories under this temporary directory, we can use `tempfile()`

```r
aaa_dir <- tempfile("aaa")
dir.create(aaa_dir)
```


**options()**

Set or change global options:

```r
# change or add option aaa to value "AAA" but return the original options
orig_ops <- options(aaa = "AAA")

# retrive option aaa
x <- getOption("aaa")  # x is "AAA"

# retore to original options
options(orig_ops)

# now the aaa is NULL as it does not exist
getOption("aaa")
```

**on.exit()**

Record expression to be run when a function exits (success or failure). It can be used to restore options and working directory.

```r
# restore options
print_2_digits <- function(x) {
  # keep a copy of original options and then change digits
  op <- options(digits = 2)
  # retore options when exiting function, even function failed. So place
  # on.exit() right after the option changed and before possible failure
  on.exit(options(op))
  print(1 / x)
}
print(3.14159265)           # all digits
print_2_digits(3.14159265)  # 3.1
print(3.14159265)           # all digits
print_2_digits("abcdefg")   # error
print(3.14159265)           # all digits

# restore working directory
read_file <- function(dir_path, file_name) {
    wd_oroginal <- getwd()
    setwd(dir_path)
    on.exit(setwd(wd_original)
    
    read.csv(file_name)
}
```

**.onLoad()**

In package development, `.onLoad` function is used to run code when `library(aaa)` a package. The function is usually placed in `R/zzz.R` (yes, zzz.R) like

```r
.onLoad <- function(libname, pkgname) {
    # load required packages
    if (!require(ggplot2)) {
        install.packages("ggplot2")
        library(ggplot2)
    }
    
    # some other actions
}
```

**tryCatch**

`tryCatch` is used to continue the code execution in case of an error (or warning). It is slow so do not use it in very large for loop.

The standard use case: if the expression is successful, returns the output of the expression. If there is error or warning, returns `NULL`  or specified values.

```r
beera <- function(expr){
  tryCatch(expr,
         error = function(e){
           message("An error occurred:\n", e)
           return("hahaha")  # without this, returns NULL in case of error
         },
         
         # the waring section is optional. Without it, tryCatch just return the output
         # of the expr, for example, as.numeric(c("1", "one")) returns c(c, NA)
         warning = function(w){
           # if a warning, print out this message and return nothing
           message("A warning occured:\n", w)
           return(99999)  # without this, returns NULL in case of warning
         },
         
         # The finally section can be used for cleaning up database connections and
         # logging information to a file. Never use it for return value as it will
         # overwrite any previous return.
         finally = {
           message("Finally done!")
         })
}

beera(1 + 1)  # 2
beera(1 / 0) # Inf
beera(as.numeric("1", "one"))  # NULL, with warning message
```


## cli

https://github.com/r-lib/cli/

Used to format output on R console. It allows R code in the messages.

```
> library(cli)
> pkgs <- c("aaa", "bbb", "ccc")
> cli_alert_success("Downloaded {length(pkgs)} packages.")
✔ Downloaded 3 packages.

> f <- "aaa.txt"
> cli_alert_danger("Failed to open the file {f}")
✖ Failed to open the file aaa.txt

> cli_h1("heading 1")

── heading 1 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
> cli_h2("heading 2")

── heading 2 ──

> cli_h3("heading 3")
── heading 3 
```

Progress bar

```r
clean <- function() {
  cli_progress_bar("Cleaning data", total = 100)
  for (i in 1:100) {
    Sys.sleep(5/100)
    cli_progress_update()
  }
}
clean()
```

## withr
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/withr/vignettes/changing-and-restoring-state.html

This package is used to temporarily change global state within a scope. The global state is restored when out of the scope.It has two set of functions

- `with_xxx(...)`: changes state of `xxx` inside this function
- `local_xxx(...)`: usually called inside a custom function and change the state inside the custom function

**Examples** graphics parameters

```r
# the default global color and pch for graphic parameters are "black" and 1
# which can be checked with par("col") and par("pch")
plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes global par parameters

# with_par changes parameters in function par() inside the scope
# of with_par(...)
withr::with_par(
    list(col = "red", pch = 19), # change color and pch
    plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes par parameters inside this scope
)

# out of the scope, restore to global par parameters
plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes global par parameters


# local_par changes state inside my_plot function
my_plot <- function() {
  withr::local_par(list(col = "red", pch = 19))
  plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes par parameters inside this scope
}
my_plot()
```

**Examples** working directory

```r
# change working directory in a function using local_dir function so we eo not 
# need to using getwd and setwd to change directory back and forth
run_selfSrv <- function(selfSrv_dir) {
    withr::local_dir(selfSrv_dir)
    system("Rscript pea1.R")
}
```


## processx

The package provide enhanced functionality (`processx::run()`) compared  base R's `system()` and `system2()` function. Use this package if the two base functions fail to do. Otherwise stick to the base R functions.

```r
processx::run("ls", "-ltr")

# $status
# [1] 0
# 
# $stdout
# [1] "total 184\ndrwxr-xr-x 3 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 vignettes\ndrwxr-xr
# -x 4 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 tests\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl   414 May  1 21:1
# 4 rextendr.Rproj\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  5373 May  1 21:14 README.Rmd\n-rw-r
# --r-- 1 gl gl  5441 May  1 21:14 README.md\ndrwxr-xr-x 2 gl gl  4096 May 
#  1 21:14 R\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl   431 May  1 21:14 _pkgdown.yml\n-rw-r--r-
# - 1 gl gl  2987 May  1 21:14 NEWS.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  1343 May  1 21:
# 14 NAMESPACE\ndrwxr-xr-x 3 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 man\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl 
# gl  1075 May  1 21:14 LICENSE.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl    46 May  1 21:14 L
# ICENSE\ndrwxr-xr-x 4 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 inst\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  2
# 159 May  1 21:14 DESCRIPTION\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl   850 May  1 21:14 cran-
# comments.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  5300 May  1 21:14 CONTRIBUTING.md\n-rw-r
# --r-- 1 gl gl  5539 May  1 21:14 CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  
#  232 May  1 21:14 codecov.yml\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  2419 May  1 21:18 prin
# ciples.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl 92464 May  2 06:36 tags\n"
# 
# $stderr
# [1] ""
# 
# $timeout
# [1] FALSE

```

## covr
Check percentage of code covered by unit tests.

- How to ignore code in unit tests?
    - https://covr.r-lib.org/reference/exclusions.html
    - ignore a function, or multiple lines of code
        ```r
       # nocov start
       func <- function() {
           # skip
       }
       # nocov end
        ```
    - ignore one line of code
        ```r
        func <- function() {
            x <- x + 1  # noconv
        }
        ```
    - other methods are not as straightforward as the two above.

Commit message:

manage environment for a project using .libPaths
- add .libPaths("path/to/mylibs/") to the project's .Rprofile
- only system packages and packages in this path will be available to
  the project.

R_packages.md, after:

## low-dependency packages
Packages depends only on R or base-R packages.

- data.table
- stringi
- cli
- rlang
- withr
- glue
- rprojroot and here

## base

**warning()**

R warning messages are usually suppressed for a clean run. In case of custom warning message in functions, we prefer to show the warning when running the function. In this case, we will have to be explicit when calling warning()

```r
my_function <- function(x) {
    # other code
    if (x < 0) {
        # immediate. = TRUE to print warning message no matter what the warn option is
        warning("x is negative", immediate. = TRUE)
    }
    print(x)
}

my_function(-1)
#  Warning in my_function(-1) : x is negative
#  [1] -1
```

To view option of warning

```r
getOption("warn")
```

- `2`: turn warnings into errors and stop run.
- `1`: same as set `immediate. = TRUE`, print warning message immediatedly.
- `0`: store the warning until top level function returns, that is, the warning message is not printed where you want it be, but instead the whole function completes.
- `-1`: warnings are ignored.
- `-2`: warnings are ignored.


**.libPath(), manage packages for a project to create a project-specific environment**

R library typically installed in two locations:

- System R packages are installed at, for example, `xxx/R/4.4.1/lib/R/library`.
- User packages are installed in a separate location, by default, at home directory like `/home/gl/R/x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-library/4.4`
- We can specify a directory to install packages and only use packages installed in this directory (of cause include system R packages).
    ```r
    # show where are packages installed currently
    .libPaths(
       # [1] "/home/gl/R/x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-library/4.4" "/opt/R/4.4.1/lib/R/library" 
    # show installed packages in above paths
    installed.packages()
    # specify a new path for user packages. Effective for current R session. Voided if R is restarted.
    .libPaths("my-libs")
    .libPaths()
        # [1] "/home/gl/tmpRProject/my-libs" "/opt/R/4.4.1/lib/R/library" 
    # install packages to my-libs/
    install.packages("data.table")
    ```
- To automatically use a libPath for a project, add `.libPaths("my-libs")` to the project's `.Rprofile`. When a R session starts from the project root, the library path is set to `my-libs`/
    - This is a common practice to set an isolated environment for a project.
    - Unlike `renv`, we can install packages from local source files.



**tempfile()**

Each R session has a unique temporary directory, which can be created by `tempdir()`. To create multiple unique subdirectories under this temporary directory, we can use `tempfile()`

```r
aaa_dir <- tempfile("aaa")
dir.create(aaa_dir)
```


**options()**

Set or change global options:

```r
# change or add option aaa to value "AAA" but return the original options
orig_ops <- options(aaa = "AAA")

# retrive option aaa
x <- getOption("aaa")  # x is "AAA"

# retore to original options
options(orig_ops)

# now the aaa is NULL as it does not exist
getOption("aaa")
```

**on.exit()**

Record expression to be run when a function exits (success or failure). It can be used to restore options and working directory.

```r
# restore options
print_2_digits <- function(x) {
  # keep a copy of original options and then change digits
  op <- options(digits = 2)
  # retore options when exiting function, even function failed. So place
  # on.exit() right after the option changed and before possible failure
  on.exit(options(op))
  print(1 / x)
}
print(3.14159265)           # all digits
print_2_digits(3.14159265)  # 3.1
print(3.14159265)           # all digits
print_2_digits("abcdefg")   # error
print(3.14159265)           # all digits

# restore working directory
read_file <- function(dir_path, file_name) {
    wd_oroginal <- getwd()
    setwd(dir_path)
    on.exit(setwd(wd_original)
    
    read.csv(file_name)
}
```

**.onLoad()**

In package development, `.onLoad` function is used to run code when `library(aaa)` a package. The function is usually placed in `R/zzz.R` (yes, zzz.R) like

```r
.onLoad <- function(libname, pkgname) {
    # load required packages
    if (!require(ggplot2)) {
        install.packages("ggplot2")
        library(ggplot2)
    }
    
    # some other actions
}
```

**tryCatch**

`tryCatch` is used to continue the code execution in case of an error (or warning). It is slow so do not use it in very large for loop.

The standard use case: if the expression is successful, returns the output of the expression. If there is error or warning, returns `NULL`  or specified values.

```r
beera <- function(expr){
  tryCatch(expr,
         error = function(e){
           message("An error occurred:\n", e)
           return("hahaha")  # without this, returns NULL in case of error
         },
         
         # the waring section is optional. Without it, tryCatch just return the output
         # of the expr, for example, as.numeric(c("1", "one")) returns c(c, NA)
         warning = function(w){
           # if a warning, print out this message and return nothing
           message("A warning occured:\n", w)
           return(99999)  # without this, returns NULL in case of warning
         },
         
         # The finally section can be used for cleaning up database connections and
         # logging information to a file. Never use it for return value as it will
         # overwrite any previous return.
         finally = {
           message("Finally done!")
         })
}

beera(1 + 1)  # 2
beera(1 / 0) # Inf
beera(as.numeric("1", "one"))  # NULL, with warning message
```


## cli

https://github.com/r-lib/cli/

Used to format output on R console. It allows R code in the messages.

```
> library(cli)
> pkgs <- c("aaa", "bbb", "ccc")
> cli_alert_success("Downloaded {length(pkgs)} packages.")
✔ Downloaded 3 packages.

> f <- "aaa.txt"
> cli_alert_danger("Failed to open the file {f}")
✖ Failed to open the file aaa.txt

> cli_h1("heading 1")

── heading 1 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
> cli_h2("heading 2")

── heading 2 ──

> cli_h3("heading 3")
── heading 3 
```

Progress bar

```r
clean <- function() {
  cli_progress_bar("Cleaning data", total = 100)
  for (i in 1:100) {
    Sys.sleep(5/100)
    cli_progress_update()
  }
}
clean()
```

## withr
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/withr/vignettes/changing-and-restoring-state.html

This package is used to temporarily change global state within a scope. The global state is restored when out of the scope.It has two set of functions

- `with_xxx(...)`: changes state of `xxx` inside this function
- `local_xxx(...)`: usually called inside a custom function and change the state inside the custom function

**Examples** graphics parameters

```r
# the default global color and pch for graphic parameters are "black" and 1
# which can be checked with par("col") and par("pch")
plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes global par parameters

# with_par changes parameters in function par() inside the scope
# of with_par(...)
withr::with_par(
    list(col = "red", pch = 19), # change color and pch
    plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes par parameters inside this scope
)

# out of the scope, restore to global par parameters
plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes global par parameters


# local_par changes state inside my_plot function
my_plot <- function() {
  withr::local_par(list(col = "red", pch = 19))
  plot(mtcars$hp, mtcars$wt) # the plot takes par parameters inside this scope
}
my_plot()
```

**Examples** working directory

```r
# change working directory in a function using local_dir function so we eo not 
# need to using getwd and setwd to change directory back and forth
run_selfSrv <- function(selfSrv_dir) {
    withr::local_dir(selfSrv_dir)
    system("Rscript pea1.R")
}
```


## processx

The package provide enhanced functionality (`processx::run()`) compared  base R's `system()` and `system2()` function. Use this package if the two base functions fail to do. Otherwise stick to the base R functions.

```r
processx::run("ls", "-ltr")

# $status
# [1] 0
# 
# $stdout
# [1] "total 184\ndrwxr-xr-x 3 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 vignettes\ndrwxr-xr
# -x 4 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 tests\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl   414 May  1 21:1
# 4 rextendr.Rproj\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  5373 May  1 21:14 README.Rmd\n-rw-r
# --r-- 1 gl gl  5441 May  1 21:14 README.md\ndrwxr-xr-x 2 gl gl  4096 May 
#  1 21:14 R\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl   431 May  1 21:14 _pkgdown.yml\n-rw-r--r-
# - 1 gl gl  2987 May  1 21:14 NEWS.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  1343 May  1 21:
# 14 NAMESPACE\ndrwxr-xr-x 3 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 man\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl 
# gl  1075 May  1 21:14 LICENSE.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl    46 May  1 21:14 L
# ICENSE\ndrwxr-xr-x 4 gl gl  4096 May  1 21:14 inst\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  2
# 159 May  1 21:14 DESCRIPTION\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl   850 May  1 21:14 cran-
# comments.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  5300 May  1 21:14 CONTRIBUTING.md\n-rw-r
# --r-- 1 gl gl  5539 May  1 21:14 CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  
#  232 May  1 21:14 codecov.yml\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl  2419 May  1 21:18 prin
# ciples.md\n-rw-r--r-- 1 gl gl 92464 May  2 06:36 tags\n"
# 
# $stderr
# [1] ""
# 
# $timeout
# [1] FALSE

```

## covr
Check percentage of code covered by unit tests.

- How to ignore code in unit tests?
    - https://covr.r-lib.org/reference/exclusions.html
    - ignore a function, or multiple lines of code
        ```r
       # nocov start
       func <- function() {
           # skip
       }
       # nocov end
        ```
    - ignore one line of code
        ```r
        func <- function() {
            x <- x + 1  # noconv
        }
        ```
    - other methods are not as straightforward as the two above.
