Rust_language.md, before:

## Outline

- Major reference
- Workflow and SOP
- Minimal examples
- Glossaries
- Raw notes

## Major reference ============================================================

- The Rust Programing Language, The Book: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/
    - with quiz: https://rust-book.cs.brown.edu/experiment-intro.html
- Rust By Example, RBE: https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/
- Udemy: Ultimate Rust Crash Course: https://www.udemy.com/course/ultimate-rust-crash-course/

## Workflow and SOP ===========================================================

### SOP: manage project with cargo

- commands
    - `$ cargo new xxx` to create a new project.
    - `$ cargo run` to run the project for test purpose
    - `$ cargo check` to quickly check if the project is compilable.
    - `$ cargo build --release` to build executable for release. It is an optimized build and is slow than simple `$ cargo build`.
    - `$ cargo update` to update dependencies
    - `$ cargo doc --open` to generate and view documentation of the project.
- files
    - `Cargo.toml`: specify dependencies and versions. `$ cargo update` will only update to the lastes of the major version. For example, if the version is `8.5.2` in the file, the update only update it to the latest `8.x.x` but not `9.x.x`.
    - `Cargo.lock`: locks the dependency versions of the project when the project was first build or run. The future `$ cargo run` and `$ cargo build` will use the versions locked in this file unless run `$ cargo update`.
    - to update the major version, must manually modify `Cargo.toml` file.

## Minimal examples ===========================================================

## Glossaries =================================================================

## Raw notes ==================================================================

### 1.2 Hello, World

- [x] writing and running a Rust program

    - create file `main.rs`
        ```rust
        fn main() {
            println!("Hello, world"); // ! indicates macro, not function
        }
        ```
    - compile the file with `$ rustc main.rs`, which create an executable file `main`.
    - run the executable with `$ ./main`. It can be run without Rust installed.

### 1.3 Hello, Cargo

- [ ] create a project with Cargo
    - Cargo is Rust's build system and package manager
    - `$ cargo new hello_cargo` to create a new project and change directory to this project.
    - The initial files and directories

        |-- Cargo.toml
        |-- src/
            |-- main.rs
        |-- .git/
        |-- .gitignore

    - file `Cargo.tmol`, the configuration for build
        ```toml
        [package]
        name = "hello_cargo"
        version = "0.1.0"
        edition = "2021"

        # See more keys and their definitions at https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html

        [dependencies]
        ```

    - `$ cargo run` to **build** and **run** the project. The resulting directory is shown below. The build results are in `target/`.
        .
        ├── Cargo.lock
        ├── Cargo.toml
        ├── src
        │   └── main.rs
        └── target
            ├── CACHEDIR.TAG
            └── debug
                ├── build
                ├── deps
                │   ├── hello_cargo-509b9f0437440349
                │   └── hello_cargo-509b9f0437440349.d
                ├── examples
                ├── hello_cargo
                ├── hello_cargo.d
                └── incremental
                    └── hello_cargo-3126xnd42m8w0
                        ├── s-gli30nzpvg-lrek9b-2d30rzle7wwfe
                        │   ├── 2i9jyl3pxdf5etxo.o
                        │   ├── 31zlg2245xt8ksz7.o
                        │   ├── 3np6xw9hm19hjnfl.o
                        │   ├── 4fk6laxkr9oabmrl.o
                        │   ├── 4kt3ygatlq124166.o
                        │   ├── dep-graph.bin
                        │   ├── mn88feykr2k9mmk.o
                        │   ├── query-cache.bin
                        │   └── work-products.bin
                        └── s-gli30nzpvg-lrek9b.lock

    - `$ cargo check` to quickly check if the project can be compiled. It is fast as it does not generate executable.

    - `$ cargo build --release` to compile with optimization and create an executable in `target/release`, which contains several files and directories. But the executable `hello_cargo` can be copied and run anywhere.

        └── release
            ├── build
            ├── deps
            │   ├── hello_cargo-57332a145d3af13d
            │   └── hello_cargo-57332a145d3af13d.d
            ├── examples
            ├── hello_cargo
            ├── hello_cargo.d
            └── incremental

    - what are in the `release` directory?
        - only the executable is required to run
        - all others are artifacts for quick rebuild.

### 2. Programming a guessing game

- [ ] elements in the code
    - `use std::io;`  use library `io` from standard library `std`
    - `std::prelude` defines items that are automatically imported
    - `io` and many standard libraries are also prelude but needs to be imported with `use std::xxx`.
    - `let mut guess = String::new();`
        - `let` to create a variable
        - `mut` specifies a mutable variable. By default a variable is immutable in Rust
        - `String` is a **string type** provided by `std::prelude` and function `String::new()` generate a new instance of string.
    - `io::stdin().read_line($mut guess).expect("Failed to read line");`
        - `io::stdin()` creates an instance of `Stdin` for standard input handle
        - `read_line(&mut guess)` is a method of standard input handle that read the standard input and append the input in the mutable variable `guess`.
            - `&` indicates the this argument is a reference to `mut guess`
        - `expect("Failed to read line")` to handle potential failure
            - `read_line` also return a **Result** (called **enum**) that can be one of multiple states such as `Ok` and `Err`. Each state is called a **variant**.
            - `expect()` is a method of Restult type
        - `println!("You guessed: {guess}");` where `{}` is a placeholder for the values of `guess`
            - other use of place holder, empty placeholder holds value of expression after it.
                ```rust
                let x = 5;
                let y = 10;
                println!("x = {x} and y + 2 = {}", y + 2);
                ```
    - crate is a collection of Rust source code files.
        - binary crate: this guessing game project is to create a binary crate, which is an executable
        - library crate: like R packages, containing code to be used in other programs.
    - use library crates
        - declare dependencies in `Cargo.toml` file
            ```toml
            [dependencies]
            rand = "0.8.5"
            ```
        - `$ cargo build` to download crate `rand` and its dependencies
    - `Cargo.lock` file lock the versions of dependencies the first time they are compiled
        - the version remains the same as specified by this file in all later build unless the command says otherwise explicitly
        - `$ cargo update` to update the version of dependencies
    - `$ cargo doc --open`: Generate documentation for the project, which list help documentation of functions and dependencies of the project.

### 3 Common programming concepts

#### 3.1 variables and mutability

**concurrent programming** is a form of programming in which several processes run concurrently during overlapping time periods.

**constant vs immutable variables**: constant will never change
    - variables are immutable by default, but variable name can be re-declaired. For example after we define `let x = 3`, we cannot simply reassign a value with `x = 9`. However, we can re-declair `x` with `let x = 9`, which is called **shadowning**.
    - constant can only be declaired once. After declair `const ABC: u32 = 24 * 3600` we cannot declair again with `const ABC: u32 = 24 * 60 * 60`. That is, we cannot assign any value to `ABC` again.

**shadowing and scope**: shadowing is only valid within its scope
    - curly braces `{...}` define a scope. A shadowing inside it will **NOT** affect the variables outside it
    - example: in the code below, `let x = x * 2` inside `{}` does not change x value out side it.
        ```rust
        fn main() {
            let x = 5;

            let x = x + 1; //now 6

            {
                let x = x * 2; // here x is 12
                println!("The value of x in the inner scope is: {x}");
            }

            println!("The value of x is: {x}"); // x is still 6 !!!!!
        }
        ```
        
#### 3.2 data types

**static data type**: As a statically typed language, Rust must know the types of all variables at compile time.

**Literals**: in computer science, a literal represents a fixed value that can be assigned to a variable or constant. For example, `12` is an integer literal, `"abc"` is a string literal, and `["cat", "dog"]` is a list (python) literal.

**scalar types**: A scalar type represents a single value. There four primary scalar types:
    - integer types like `u32`, `i32`, `u64`, `i64`:
        - **unsigned integer** has values like 0, 1, 2, .... No negative values.
        - **signed integer** can have negative, zero, and positive integers.
        - we can add underscore `_` to integer literals. For example, `12_34_567` is the same as `1234567`.
        - The default integer type is `i32`.
        - Integer division returns an integer, truncates toward zero.
    - floating-point types like `f32` and `f64`. 
        - Rust's default is `f64`. All floating-point types are signed.
        - Integer literals cannot be assigned to floating-point variables
            ```rust
            let x: f64 = 123; //wrong
            let x: f64 = 123.0; //correct
            ```
    - numerical operations must match types of two numbers
        ```rust
        let x: i32 = 5 / 3;  //return 1
        let x = -5 / 3; //return -1, Rust can guess data type for x, but slow
        let x = 5.0 / 3; //error, floating-point cannot be devied by integer 
        let x: f32 = 5 / 3; //error, types mismatch, 5 / 3 is integer
        let x: f32 = 5.0 / 3.0; //return 1.66666...
        ```
    - Boolean type with `true` or `false`
        ```rust
        let t: bool = true;
        ```
    - character type is a single character (can be unicode) in signle quote. It is NOT string type.
        ```rust
        let c: char = 'z';
        let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
        let c: char = "z"; // error in double quote
        let c: char = 'abc'; //error, more than one character
       ```
       
**Compound types** contain multiple values
    - tuple type can group different types. A tuple has a fixed length once created. A empty tuple is called `unit` and is written in `()`.
        ```rust
        let aaa: (i32, f64, char) = (500, 3.14, 't');
        let (x, y, z) = aaa; // destructure the tuple into elements
        println!("aaa has {x}, {y}, {z}");
        
        // or use aaa.0, aaa.1, ..., to access element by index
        let ele_1 = aaa.0
        println!("aaa first element is {ele_1}");
        println!("aaa first element is {aaa.0}"); // error, {...} is a placeholder for a varaible, not a value
        ```
    - array type can only have elements of the same type and have a fixed length
        ```rust
        // declair an array of type u32 and 5 elements
        let arr: [u32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
        // array of 100 string "abc"
        let arr = ["abc": 100];
        // access array element
        let x = arr[0]
        ```
        
**Standard library types** from RBE  chapt 19.

#### 3.3 FunctionsI

**Statement** performs some action and does not return a value. Therefore a statement cannot be assigned to a variable. Examples
    ```rust
    let y = 6;
    let x = (let y = 6); //error: expected expressioin, found statement ('let')
    ```
    
**Expression** returns a value and can be assigned to a variable.
    ```rust
    // 123 is an expression in
    let x = 123;
    // a new scope block created with curly brackets is an expression
    let y = {
        let x = 3;
        x + 1 // not ending with ;
    };
    // calling a function or macro is an expression
    let z = my_functions();
    ```
    
**Function with return values**: rules to follow
    - types of argument must be specified 
    - type of return must be specified
    - last statement is the return, or return with `return` keyword
    - example
        ```rust
        // good function
        fn add_2(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
            return x + y   // with or without return is ok
        }
        
        // error: return unit (), not i32 as declaired
        fn add_2(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
            x + y;   
        }
        ```
        
#### 3.4 control flow

**`if` must use `bool`** data type as condition
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let number = 6;

        if number % 4 == 0 {
            println!("number is divisible by 4");
        } else if number % 3 == 0 {
            println!("number is divisible by 3");
        } else if number % 2 == 0 {
            println!("number is divisible by 2");
        } else {
            println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
        }
    }
    ```
    
**`if` is an expression** so can be assigned to a variable. The values of the final expressions of each arm must have the same data type, as the compiler needs to determine the variable data type at compiling, NOT at runtime.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let condition = true;
        let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };

        println!("The value of number is: {number}");
    }
    ```
    
**`loop` runs for ever** until stopped by `break`. We can also use `continue` to skip the rest and start from beginning.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut i: i32 = 0;
        loop {
            i = i + 1;
            if i > 10 {break};
            println!("again!");
        }
    }
    ```
    
**`loop` is an expression** that can be assigned to a variable. The return of a `loop` is the expression after `break`. The ending `;` does not matter.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut counter = 0;

        let result = loop {
            counter += 1;

            if counter == 10 {
                break counter * 2; // return, end with or without ; is ok
            } // ok with or without ending :
        };

        println!("The result is {result}");
    }
    ```
    
**`loop` labels** to disambiguate between multiple loops. If a loop is inside another loop, by default, `break` and `continue` apply to the inner-most loop where they are inside. To break their parent loop, we assign a label to that loop. A label starts with a single quote `'` followed by `:`, eg., `'xxxx: loop` in the example below.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut count = 0;
        'counting_up: loop {
            println!("count = {count}");
            let mut remaining = 10;

            loop {
                println!("remaining = {remaining}");
                if remaining == 9 {
                    break;
                }
                if count == 2 {
                    break 'counting_up;
                }
                remaining -= 1;
            }

            count += 1;
        }
        println!("End count = {count}");
    }
    ```
    
**`while` loop works the same** as in R
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut number = 3;

        while number != 0 {
            println!("{number}!");

            number -= 1; // syntax like Python
        }

        println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
    }
    ```
    
**`for` loop works the same** as in R
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

        for element in a {
            println!("the value is: {element}");
        }
    }
    ```
    
**range `(1..4)` for 1, 2, 3, 4**
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        for number in (1..4).rev() {  //.rev() to reverse the range
            println!("{number}!");
        }
        println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
    }
    ```
    
### 4. Understanding ownership

#### 4.1 What is ownership

**Garbage collection** is used by many other languages to manage memory, which regularly looks for no-longer-used memory while running. The programmer must explicitly allocate and free the memory.

**stack, heap, pointer**: memory available to code at **runtime**
    - **stack stores values of known fixed size** in memory in first-in-first-out order. Adding data is called **pushing on** to the stack. Removing data is called **popping off** the stack.
    - **heap allocates a space in memory identified by a pointer to an unknown or changing value**. The pointer, whose size is known and fixed, is stored in a stack. To add data, the program first locate the pointer in stack, which then lead to the heap.

**Ownership rules**
    - Each value in Rust has an owner.
    - There can only be one owner at a time.
    - When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

**string literals** are fixed string with type `&str`
    - used when the value of a string is known at compile time
    - is hard-coded like `"abc"`, must inside double quote!!!!
    - do not use `mut` as by definition, string literal are immutable
    ```rust
    let s1 = "Hello";
    let s2: &str = "World";
    let mut s3 = "whatever";   //warning, mut not needed but not an error
    ```

**String type** provided by standard library
    - https://linuxhint.com/strings-in-rust/
    - ways to create String object
    - `let s = string::from("hello")`: generated from a string literal
    - methods for string type
        - `s.push_str(", world")`: to append a string literal to a string
        - 

**`&String` type is a reference to a `String`**
    - It has no ownership. It exists as long as the `String` it points to is not out of scope.

Commit message:

read line from terminal in rust

Rust_language.md, after:

## Outline

- Major reference
- Workflow and SOP
- Minimal examples
- QA
- Raw notes

## Major reference ============================================================

- The Rust Programing Language, The Book: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/
    - with quiz: https://rust-book.cs.brown.edu/experiment-intro.html
- Rust By Example, RBE: https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/
- Udemy: Ultimate Rust Crash Course: https://www.udemy.com/course/ultimate-rust-crash-course/

## Workflow and SOP ===========================================================

### SOP: manage project with cargo

- commands
    - `$ cargo new xxx` to create a new project.
    - `$ cargo run` to run the project for test purpose
    - `$ cargo check` to quickly check if the project is compilable.
    - `$ cargo build --release` to build executable for release. It is an optimized build and is slow than simple `$ cargo build`.
    - `$ cargo update` to update dependencies
    - `$ cargo doc --open` to generate and view documentation of the project.
- files
    - `Cargo.toml`: specify dependencies and versions. `$ cargo update` will only update to the lastes of the major version. For example, if the version is `8.5.2` in the file, the update only update it to the latest `8.x.x` but not `9.x.x`.
    - `Cargo.lock`: locks the dependency versions of the project when the project was first build or run. The future `$ cargo run` and `$ cargo build` will use the versions locked in this file unless run `$ cargo update`.
    - to update the major version, must manually modify `Cargo.toml` file.

## Minimal examples ===========================================================

## QA ======= =================================================================

### QA: how to read input from terminal?
    
    ```rust
    use std::io;
    let mut aaa = String.new();
    io::stdin().read_line(&mut aaa).expect("Fail to read line");
    println!("aaa is {aaa}");
    ```



## Raw notes ==================================================================

### 1.2 Hello, World

- [x] writing and running a Rust program

    - create file `main.rs`
        ```rust
        fn main() {
            println!("Hello, world"); // ! indicates macro, not function
        }
        ```
    - compile the file with `$ rustc main.rs`, which create an executable file `main`.
    - run the executable with `$ ./main`. It can be run without Rust installed.

### 1.3 Hello, Cargo

- [x] create a project with Cargo
    - Cargo is Rust's build system and package manager
    - `$ cargo new hello_cargo` to create a new project and change directory to this project.
    - The initial files and directories

        |-- Cargo.toml
        |-- src/
            |-- main.rs
        |-- .git/
        |-- .gitignore

    - file `Cargo.tmol`, the configuration for build
        ```toml
        [package]
        name = "hello_cargo"
        version = "0.1.0"
        edition = "2021"

        # See more keys and their definitions at https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html

        [dependencies]
        ```

    - `$ cargo run` to **build** and **run** the project. The resulting directory is shown below. The build results are in `target/`.
        .
        ├── Cargo.lock
        ├── Cargo.toml
        ├── src
        │   └── main.rs
        └── target
            ├── CACHEDIR.TAG
            └── debug
                ├── build
                ├── deps
                │   ├── hello_cargo-509b9f0437440349
                │   └── hello_cargo-509b9f0437440349.d
                ├── examples
                ├── hello_cargo
                ├── hello_cargo.d
                └── incremental
                    └── hello_cargo-3126xnd42m8w0
                        ├── s-gli30nzpvg-lrek9b-2d30rzle7wwfe
                        │   ├── 2i9jyl3pxdf5etxo.o
                        │   ├── 31zlg2245xt8ksz7.o
                        │   ├── 3np6xw9hm19hjnfl.o
                        │   ├── 4fk6laxkr9oabmrl.o
                        │   ├── 4kt3ygatlq124166.o
                        │   ├── dep-graph.bin
                        │   ├── mn88feykr2k9mmk.o
                        │   ├── query-cache.bin
                        │   └── work-products.bin
                        └── s-gli30nzpvg-lrek9b.lock

    - `$ cargo check` to quickly check if the project can be compiled. It is fast as it does not generate executable.

    - `$ cargo build --release` to compile with optimization and create an executable in `target/release`, which contains several files and directories. But the executable `hello_cargo` can be copied and run anywhere.

        └── release
            ├── build
            ├── deps
            │   ├── hello_cargo-57332a145d3af13d
            │   └── hello_cargo-57332a145d3af13d.d
            ├── examples
            ├── hello_cargo
            ├── hello_cargo.d
            └── incremental

    - what are in the `release` directory?
        - only the executable is required to run
        - all others are artifacts for quick rebuild.

### 2. Programming a guessing game

- [x] elements in the code
    - `use std::io;`  use library `io` from standard library `std`
    - `std::prelude` defines items that are automatically imported
    - `io` and many standard libraries are also prelude but needs to be imported with `use std::xxx`.
    - `let mut guess = String::new();`
        - `let` to create a variable
        - `mut` specifies a mutable variable. By default a variable is immutable in Rust
        - `String` is a **string type** provided by `std::prelude` and function `String::new()` generate a new instance of string.
    - `io::stdin().read_line($mut guess).expect("Failed to read line");`
        - `io::stdin()` creates an instance of `Stdin` for standard input handle
        - `read_line(&mut guess)` is a method of standard input handle that read the standard input and append the input in the mutable variable `guess`.
            - `&` indicates the this argument is a reference to `mut guess`
        - `expect("Failed to read line")` to handle potential failure
            - `read_line` also return a **Result** (called **enum**) that can be one of multiple states such as `Ok` and `Err`. Each state is called a **variant**.
            - `expect()` is a method of Restult type
        - `println!("You guessed: {guess}");` where `{}` is a placeholder for the values of `guess`
            - other use of place holder, empty placeholder holds value of expression after it.
                ```rust
                let x = 5;
                let y = 10;
                println!("x = {x} and y + 2 = {}", y + 2);
                ```
    - crate is a collection of Rust source code files.
        - binary crate: this guessing game project is to create a binary crate, which is an executable
        - library crate: like R packages, containing code to be used in other programs.
    - use library crates
        - declare dependencies in `Cargo.toml` file
            ```toml
            [dependencies]
            rand = "0.8.5"
            ```
        - `$ cargo build` to download crate `rand` and its dependencies
    - `Cargo.lock` file lock the versions of dependencies the first time they are compiled
        - the version remains the same as specified by this file in all later build unless the command says otherwise explicitly
        - `$ cargo update` to update the version of dependencies
    - `$ cargo doc --open`: Generate documentation for the project, which list help documentation of functions and dependencies of the project.

### 3 Common programming concepts

#### 3.1 variables and mutability

**concurrent programming** is a form of programming in which several processes run concurrently during overlapping time periods.

**constant vs immutable variables**: constant will never change
    - variables are immutable by default, but variable name can be re-declaired. For example after we define `let x = 3`, we cannot simply reassign a value with `x = 9`. However, we can re-declair `x` with `let x = 9`, which is called **shadowning**.
    - constant can only be declaired once. After declair `const ABC: u32 = 24 * 3600` we cannot declair again with `const ABC: u32 = 24 * 60 * 60`. That is, we cannot assign any value to `ABC` again.

**shadowing and scope**: shadowing is only valid within its scope
    - curly braces `{...}` define a scope. A shadowing inside it will **NOT** affect the variables outside it
    - example: in the code below, `let x = x * 2` inside `{}` does not change x value out side it.
        ```rust
        fn main() {
            let x = 5;

            let x = x + 1; //now 6

            {
                let x = x * 2; // here x is 12
                println!("The value of x in the inner scope is: {x}");
            }

            println!("The value of x is: {x}"); // x is still 6 !!!!!
        }
        ```
        
#### 3.2 data types

**static data type**: As a statically typed language, Rust must know the types of all variables at compile time.

**Literals**: in computer science, a literal represents a fixed value that can be assigned to a variable or constant. For example, `12` is an integer literal, `"abc"` is a string literal, and `["cat", "dog"]` is a list (python) literal.

**scalar types**: A scalar type represents a single value. There four primary scalar types:
    - integer types like `u32`, `i32`, `u64`, `i64`:
        - **unsigned integer** has values like 0, 1, 2, .... No negative values.
        - **signed integer** can have negative, zero, and positive integers.
        - we can add underscore `_` to integer literals. For example, `12_34_567` is the same as `1234567`.
        - The default integer type is `i32`.
        - Integer division returns an integer, truncates toward zero.
    - floating-point types like `f32` and `f64`. 
        - Rust's default is `f64`. All floating-point types are signed.
        - Integer literals cannot be assigned to floating-point variables
            ```rust
            let x: f64 = 123; //wrong
            let x: f64 = 123.0; //correct
            ```
    - numerical operations must match types of two numbers
        ```rust
        let x: i32 = 5 / 3;  //return 1
        let x = -5 / 3; //return -1, Rust can guess data type for x, but slow
        let x = 5.0 / 3; //error, floating-point cannot be devied by integer 
        let x: f32 = 5 / 3; //error, types mismatch, 5 / 3 is integer
        let x: f32 = 5.0 / 3.0; //return 1.66666...
        ```
    - Boolean type with `true` or `false`
        ```rust
        let t: bool = true;
        ```
    - character type is a single character (can be unicode) in signle quote. It is NOT string type.
        ```rust
        let c: char = 'z';
        let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
        let c: char = "z"; // error in double quote
        let c: char = 'abc'; //error, more than one character
       ```
       
**Compound types** contain multiple values
    - tuple type can group different types. A tuple has a fixed length once created. A empty tuple is called `unit` and is written in `()`.
        ```rust
        let aaa: (i32, f64, char) = (500, 3.14, 't');
        let (x, y, z) = aaa; // destructure the tuple into elements
        println!("aaa has {x}, {y}, {z}");
        
        // or use aaa.0, aaa.1, ..., to access element by index
        let ele_1 = aaa.0
        println!("aaa first element is {ele_1}");
        println!("aaa first element is {aaa.0}"); // error, {...} is a placeholder for a varaible, not a value
        ```
    - array type can only have elements of the same type and have a fixed length
        ```rust
        // declair an array of type u32 and 5 elements
        let arr: [u32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
        // array of 100 string "abc"
        let arr = ["abc": 100];
        // access array element
        let x = arr[0]
        ```
        
**Standard library types** from RBE  chapt 19.

#### 3.3 FunctionsI

**Statement** performs some action and does not return a value. Therefore a statement cannot be assigned to a variable. Examples
    ```rust
    let y = 6;
    let x = (let y = 6); //error: expected expressioin, found statement ('let')
    ```
    
**Expression** returns a value and can be assigned to a variable.
    ```rust
    // 123 is an expression in
    let x = 123;
    // a new scope block created with curly brackets is an expression
    let y = {
        let x = 3;
        x + 1 // not ending with ;
    };
    // calling a function or macro is an expression
    let z = my_functions();
    ```
    
**Function with return values**: rules to follow
    - types of argument must be specified 
    - type of return must be specified
    - last statement is the return, or return with `return` keyword
    - example
        ```rust
        // good function
        fn add_2(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
            return x + y   // with or without return is ok
        }
        
        // error: return unit (), not i32 as declaired
        fn add_2(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
            x + y;   
        }
        ```
        
#### 3.4 control flow

**`if` must use `bool`** data type as condition
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let number = 6;

        if number % 4 == 0 {
            println!("number is divisible by 4");
        } else if number % 3 == 0 {
            println!("number is divisible by 3");
        } else if number % 2 == 0 {
            println!("number is divisible by 2");
        } else {
            println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
        }
    }
    ```
    
**`if` is an expression** so can be assigned to a variable. The values of the final expressions of each arm must have the same data type, as the compiler needs to determine the variable data type at compiling, NOT at runtime.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let condition = true;
        let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };

        println!("The value of number is: {number}");
    }
    ```
    
**`loop` runs for ever** until stopped by `break`. We can also use `continue` to skip the rest and start from beginning.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut i: i32 = 0;
        loop {
            i = i + 1;
            if i > 10 {break};
            println!("again!");
        }
    }
    ```
    
**`loop` is an expression** that can be assigned to a variable. The return of a `loop` is the expression after `break`. The ending `;` does not matter.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut counter = 0;

        let result = loop {
            counter += 1;

            if counter == 10 {
                break counter * 2; // return, end with or without ; is ok
            } // ok with or without ending :
        };

        println!("The result is {result}");
    }
    ```
    
**`loop` labels** to disambiguate between multiple loops. If a loop is inside another loop, by default, `break` and `continue` apply to the inner-most loop where they are inside. To break their parent loop, we assign a label to that loop. A label starts with a single quote `'` followed by `:`, eg., `'xxxx: loop` in the example below.
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut count = 0;
        'counting_up: loop {
            println!("count = {count}");
            let mut remaining = 10;

            loop {
                println!("remaining = {remaining}");
                if remaining == 9 {
                    break;
                }
                if count == 2 {
                    break 'counting_up;
                }
                remaining -= 1;
            }

            count += 1;
        }
        println!("End count = {count}");
    }
    ```
    
**`while` loop works the same** as in R
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let mut number = 3;

        while number != 0 {
            println!("{number}!");

            number -= 1; // syntax like Python
        }

        println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
    }
    ```
    
**`for` loop works the same** as in R
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

        for element in a {
            println!("the value is: {element}");
        }
    }
    ```
    
**range `(1..4)` for 1, 2, 3, 4**
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        for number in (1..4).rev() {  //.rev() to reverse the range
            println!("{number}!");
        }
        println!("LIFTOFF!!!");
    }
    ```
    
### 4. Understanding ownership

#### 4.1 What is ownership

**Garbage collection** is used by many other languages to manage memory, which regularly looks for no-longer-used memory while running. The programmer must explicitly allocate and free the memory.

**stack, heap, pointer**: memory available to code at **runtime**
    - **stack stores values of known fixed size** in memory in first-in-first-out order. Adding data is called **pushing on** to the stack. Removing data is called **popping off** the stack.
    - **heap allocates a space in memory identified by a pointer to an unknown or changing value**. The pointer, whose size is known and fixed, is stored in a stack. To add data, the program first locate the pointer in stack, which then lead to the heap.

**Ownership rules**
    - Each value in Rust has an owner.
    - There can only be one owner at a time.
    - When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

**string literals** are fixed string with type `&str`
    - used when the value of a string is known at compile time
    - is hard-coded like `"abc"`, must inside double quote!!!!
    - do not use `mut` as by definition, string literal are immutable
    ```rust
    let s1 = "Hello";
    let s2: &str = "World";
    let mut s3 = "whatever";   //warning, mut not needed but not an error
    ```

**String type** provided by standard library
    - https://linuxhint.com/strings-in-rust/
    - ways to create String object
    - `let s = string::from("hello")`: generated from a string literal
    - methods for string type
        - `s.push_str(", world")`: to append a string literal to a string
        - 

**`&String` type is a reference to a `String`**
    - It has no ownership. It exists as long as the `String` it points to is not out of scope.
